---
author: jaymz
categories:
- Uncategorized
date: '2014-02-03T17:28:02'
tags: []
title: Use ffmpeg to record desktop video on Windows
---
Want to capture your desktop for screencasts on Windows? Use **ffmpeg**! It's
totally free and has no watermarks, no ads, etc. Unfortunately, there's no GUI
nor a simple installer for inexperienced users, but I'm here to try to
alleviate some of that pain and give you the magical ffmpeg incantation to
instantly get good quality results.

## Download & Install

**NOTE:** When you go to download the installers for the tools you need, be
sure to consistently choose either the x86 or the x64 version of each. Do not
mix and match x86 and x64 installs as that will not work. If you have a 64-bit
machine, I recommend the x64 version. If your machine is ancient and somehow
only 32-bit, go with the x86 version.

First, download **ffmpeg** from [here](http://ffmpeg.zeranoe.com/builds/).
Install it to somewhere obvious like `C:\ffmpeg\`. I don't recommend
installing into `C:\Program Files\`. File paths with whitespace in them are
annoying to deal with on the command line, which is where we'll be working.

ffmpeg is the main tool that handles video and audio encoding. It muxes those
streams together and records them into a video file. Unfortunately, it does
not come bundled with a desktop video capture input source for Windows which
is what we need to capture your desktop screen with. So...

You'll need a DirectShow filter to capture your desktop that ffmpeg can use.
Go [here](https://github.com/rdp/screen-capture-recorder-to-video-windows-
free) and follow steps to download a binary version of that screen-capture-
recorder project. (As of this writing you can find those binaries hosted on
[sourceforge](http://sourceforge.net/projects/screencapturer/files/)'s
terrible, terrible site.)

## Capture

Open a command prompt (Start -> Run -> `cmd`). Type in the following commands,
assuming you installed ffmpeg to `C:\ffmpeg`:

    
    
    C:\>SET PATH=%PATH%;C:\ffmpeg\bin
    
    C:\>ffmpeg -f dshow -i video="screen-capture-recorder" -f dshow -ac 2 -i audio="virtual-audio-capturer" -ar 48000 -acodec libmp3lame -ab 192k -r 30 -vcodec libx264 -crf 18 -preset ultrafast -f mpegts desktop.mpg
    

That will start ffmpeg running and will capture both video from your desktop
and audio from your sound card (what you're hearing). It will encode video on-
the-fly in h.264 at 30 frames per second with high quality and encode audio
on-the-fly in MP3 at 192kbps (also high quality).

**IMPORTANT:** Press 'q' to stop. DO NOT PRESS CTRL-BREAK OR CTRL-C or you
will prematurely abort the process and the file may not be finalized properly.
Also, make sure the output file does not exist before you start recording.

Let's break this command down a bit:

  * `-f dshow` specifies that the next input source is a DirectShow filter
  * `-i video="screen-capture-recorder"` specifies the `screen-capture-recorder` desktop video source you installed earlier
  * `-f dshow` specifies that the next input source is a DirectShow filter
  * `-ac 2` specifies 2 audio channels to capture (i.e. stereo)
  * `-i audio="virtual-audio-capturer"` specifies the `virtual-audio-capturer` audio source that comes installed with the `screen-capture-recorder` (this records the audio you hear through your speakers)
  * `-ar 48000` specifies to capture audio at 48000Hz (ideal for audio/video sync)
  * `-acodec libmp3lame` specifies to use libmp3lame as the audio encoder which implements the MP3 standard
  * `-ab 192k` specifies to encode MP3 audio at 192kbps (high quality)
  * `-r 30` specifies to capture video at 30 frames per second (ideal for YouTube)
  * `-vcodec libx264` specifies to encode video using the libx264 encoder which implements the h.264 standard
  * `-crf 18` specifies the h.264 encoding quality of 18 which is good (0 = lossless, 30 = crap)
  * `-preset ultrafast` specifies an ultra-fast encoder setting so that we can reliably record without interruptions
  * `-f mpegts` to specify that we want to use MPEG-TS as our container format; this is beneficial for live streaming purposes and also for uploading to YouTube.
  * `desktop.mpg` is our output file

Feel free to tune the parameters to your liking. Enjoy!

## Advanced Usage

To get a list of all the DirectShow filters (audio and video) available for
you to record from, use this command:

    
    
    ffmpeg -list_devices true -f dshow -i dummy
    

This will output something like this (example from my system):

    
    
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0] DirectShow video devices
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0]  "screen-capture-recorder"
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0] DirectShow audio devices
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0]  "1-2 (UA-1000)"
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0]  "virtual-audio-capturer"
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0]  "3-4 (UA-1000)"
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0]  "5-6 (UA-1000)"
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0]  "7-8 (UA-1000)"
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0]  "9-10 (UA-1000)"
    [dshow @ 00000000028f83e0]  "Mon (UA-1000)"
    

I use a Roland EDIROL UA-1000 multi-channel USB audio interface which has 8
input and output channels plus a monitor input source for recording what's
going out to the speakers.

You can add more than one audio track to your video if you want to narrate
along with your video and also record the speaker output but not prematurely
mix the two tracks. Here's an example incantation (specific to my system) to
do so:

    
    
    ffmpeg -f dshow -i video="screen-capture-recorder" -ac 1 -f dshow -i audio="1-2 (UA-1000)" -ac 2 -f dshow -i audio="Mon (UA-1000)" -map 0 -r 30 -vcodec libx264 -crf 18 -preset ultrafast -map 1:0 -ar 48000 -acodec libmp3lame -ab 192k -map 2 -ar 48000 -acodec libmp3lame -ab 192k -f mpegts raw.mpg
    

I have my microphone on the "1-2 (UA-1000)" channel pair recorded to the
primary audio track (in mono) and then the monitor output "Mon (UA-1000)"
recorded to a second audio track (in stereo). Later, I extract the two audio
streams from the recorded video file and process the microphone signal to
clean it up; add compression, EQ to pull out low end and add high end, etc.
Then I mix the two tracks back together and output a final video file
including the mixed stereo audio track.

Note that parameter ordering is very important so don't go rearranging things.
The `-map` options specify how the input sources are to be mapped to output
streams in the recorded file.